Add system API endpoints for cycle cost calculation (#4110)
dfinity/portal: docs/references/ic-interface-spec.md

    ic0.time : () -> (timestamp : i64);                                                   // *
    ic0.global_timer_set : (timestamp : i64) -> i64;                                      // I G U Ry Rt C T
    ic0.performance_counter : (counter_type : i32) -> (counter : i64);                    // * s
    ic0.is_controller : (src : I, size : I) -> ( result : i32);                           // * s
    ic0.in_replicated_execution : () -> (result : i32);                                   // * s
    
    ic0.cost_call : (method_name_size: i64, payload_size : i64, dst : I) -> ();           // * s
    ic0.cost_create_canister : (dst : I) -> ();                                           // * s

>     ic0.cost_http_request(request_size : i64, max_res_bytes : i64, dst : I) -> ();        // * s
>     ic0.cost_sign_with_ecdsa(src : I, size : I, ecdsa_curve: i32, dst : I) -> ();         // * s
>     ic0.cost_sign_with_schnorr(src : I, size : I, algorithm: i32, dst : I) -> ();         // * s
>     ic0.cost_vetkd_derive_encrypted_key(src : I, size : I, vetkd_curve: i32, dst : I) -> ();  // * s

Author: ```suggestion
    ic0.cost_http_request : (request_size : i64, max_res_bytes : i64, dst : I) -> ();     // * s
    ic0.cost_sign_with_ecdsa : (src : I, size : I, ecdsa_curve: i32, dst : I) -> ();      // * s
    ic0.cost_sign_with_schnorr : (src : I, size : I, algorithm: i32, dst : I) -> ();      // * s
    ic0.cost_vetkd_derive_encrypted_key : (src : I, size : I, vetkd_curve: i32, dst : I) -> ();  // * s
```

>     ic0.replication_factor : (src : I, size : I) -> i32;                                  // * s

Author: `is_controller`, `sign_with_*` and `vetkd_..` can fail due to 1) malformed inputs and 2) invalid destinations. While these endpoints should trap on 1, they should not trap on 2. Instead, I propose to specify a special return type as follows: 
```
0: call failed
n: actual return value n
```
The caller then has to check if the result was 0 and pass the error to the user. I suggest the corresponding `RejectCode` should be 3, `DestinationInvalid`. 
0 as a guard value is fine because it cannot be a replication factor and it presumably cannot be an actual cost.

Author: Never mind. It's better not to introduce special return values. 
Removing replication_factor from this PR will remove one case. 
Discussion about the key names is ongoing.

    ic0.time : () -> (timestamp : i64);                                                   // *
    ic0.global_timer_set : (timestamp : i64) -> i64;                                      // I G U Ry Rt C T
    ic0.performance_counter : (counter_type : i32) -> (counter : i64);                    // * s
    ic0.is_controller : (src : I, size : I) -> ( result : i32);                           // * s
    ic0.in_replicated_execution : () -> (result : i32);                                   // * s
    
    ic0.cost_call : (method_name_size: i64, payload_size : i64, dst : I) -> ();           // * s
    ic0.cost_create_canister : (dst : I) -> ();                                           // * s

>     ic0.cost_http_request : (request_size : i64, max_res_bytes : i64, dst : I) -> ();     // * s

Reviewer: > Now the user has charged the canister with C cycles needlessly.

Cycles are [refunded](https://github.com/dfinity/ic/blob/665c75015ad5afcd701565580f812a04862384d5/rs/execution_environment/src/execution_environment.rs#L938) in this case.

    This traps if `ic0.data_certificate_present()` returns `0`.

### Cycle cost calculation {#system-api-cycle-cost}

Inter-canister calls have an implicit cost, and some calls to the management canister require the caller to attach cycles to the call explicitly.  

> The various cost factors may change over time, so the following system calls serve to give the canister programmatic, up-to-date information about the costs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The various cost factors may change over time, so the following system calls give the canister programmatic, up-to-date information about the costs.
```

> These system calls return costs in Cycles, represented by 128 bits, which will be written to the caller-specified `dst` pointer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These system calls return costs in Cycles, represented by 128 bits, which will be written to the heap memory starting at offset `dst`. 
```

> -   `ic0.cost_call : (method_name_size: i64, payload_size : i64, dst : I) -> () `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `ic0.cost_call : (method_name_size: i64, payload_size : i64, dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`
```
analogously below

>     The cost of an inter-canister call. `method_name_size` is the byte length of the method name, and `payload_size` is the length of the encoded argument to the method.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The cost of an inter-canister call. `method_name_size` is the byte length of the method name, and `payload_size` is the byte length of the argument to the method. 
```
I'd drop "encoded" as it doesn't matter what the argument looks like (it can as well be plain text) and "byte length" should be unambiguous.

-   `ic0.cost_create_canister : (dst : I) -> (); `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

>     The cost of creating a canister on the same subnet as the calling canister via [`create_canister`](#ic-create_canister). Note that canister creation via a call to the CMC can have a different cost if the target subnet has a different replication factor. In order to facilitate conversions, see `ic0.replication_factor`.

Reviewer: the conversions from cost on a fiduciary subnet to the cost on a regular app subnet might be imprecise due to rounding: replica always scales up from 13 to n; scaling down might give a different result.

Author: Do you mean that something like C' = C * 13/34 might round down so the true cost will be slightly higher than calculated? Sure, the caller should be careful about rounding or add a safety margin. But are you suggesting to do anything about that in the system API?

Reviewer: I suggest to either not go into details and not comment on conversions here or point out the rounding issue in the spec. The system API itself can stay as is.

-   `ic0.cost_http_request(request_size : i64, max_res_bytes : i64, dst : I) -> (); `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

>     The cost of a request via [`http_request`](#ic-http_request). `request_size` is the sum of the byte lengths of the following components of an http request: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The cost of a canister http outcall via [`http_request`](#ic-http_request). `request_size` is the sum of the byte lengths of the following components of an http request: 
```

    - url
    - method
    - headers - i.e., the sum of the lengths of all keys and values 
    - body
    - transform - i.e., the sum of the transform method name length and the length of the transform context
    

>     `max_res_bytes` is the maximum response length the caller wishes to accept. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `max_res_bytes` is the maximum response length the caller wishes to accept or the default value of `...` if no maximum response length is provided in the actual request. 
```

Author: In this syscall, the max_res_bytes is not optional, so there is no default value here. If the user follows the documentation of http_request, they will get the full picture. But I think here this formulation is misleading. 

In other words: The function signature tells the caller that they MUST provide this data explicitly.

Author: I added a sentence to clarify, let me know what you think.

Reviewer: > In this syscall, the max_res_bytes is not optional, so there is no default value here. 

There is a default value in the replica implementation that the caller has to supply here because system API doesn't allow easily modelling optional values.

Reviewer: > I added a sentence to clarify, let me know what you think.

I don't see it. Could you please share a link?

Author: pushed now

Author: Another suggestion: We can specify that the passed value is clamped to the true replica's maximum. So if the user does not want to bound the max_response_bytes in the call to the management canister, they can supply u64::MAX here and we clamp it to the true 2_000_000 (or whatever this evolves to). 

This would save the caller from having to know the true maximum when they only want to call mgmt with None.

Reviewer: I think it's a reasonable suggestion, but I'll bring this up in the spec meeting to gather more feedback.

Reviewer: Rephrased the suggestion to
```
(the caller should provide the default value of `2,000,000` if no maximum response length is provided in the actual request).
```
(as discussed separately)

-   `ic0.cost_ecdsa(src : I, size : I, dst : I) -> (); `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

-   `ic0.cost_schnorr(src : I, size : I, dst : I) -> (); `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

-   `ic0.cost_vetkey(src : I, size : I, dst : I) -> (); `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

    These system calls accept a key name via `src` + `size` for the specific signing scheme / key. See [`sign_with_ecdsa`](#ic-sign_with_ecdsa), [`sign_with_schnorr`](#ic-sign_with_schnorr) and [`vetkd_encrypted_key`](#ic-vetkd_encrypted_key) for more information. 

>     These system calls trap if `src` + `size` do not decode to a valid key name. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    These system calls trap if the textual representation does not decode to a valid key name. 
```

Reviewer: or do we use a different representation which is not textual?

Reviewer: an example might be useful to illustrate this

Author: I used encode because the user provides bytes, whereas rust demands a valid utf-8 string. But I am fine changing the language if you think decode would imply more.

Reviewer: My comment on "encode" does not apply here.

Reviewer: an example would still be useful

Author: pushed

> 

Author: TODO: Turns out, the (signing scheme, key_name)-tuple is not enough to determine the right key, because at least Schnorr has several curves in use, and they can have the same name.

-   `ic0.replication_factor : (src : I, size : I) -> i32; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

    Returns the replication factor (subnet size) of the subnet identified by the `Principal` at `src` + `size`. 

>     This system call traps if `src` + `size` do not decode to a valid `Principal` or the given `Principal` is not a subnet.   

Reviewer: "decode" sounds like the argument is the textual representation of a principal while I'd assume the binary representation to be used

-   `ic0.cost_call : (method_name_size: i64, payload_size : i64, dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

    The cost of an inter-canister call. `method_name_size` is the byte length of the method name, and `payload_size` is the byte length of the argument to the method. 

-   `ic0.cost_create_canister : (dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

    The cost of creating a canister on the same subnet as the calling canister via [`create_canister`](#ic-create_canister). Note that canister creation via a call to the CMC can have a different cost if the target subnet has a different replication factor. In order to facilitate conversions, see `ic0.replication_factor`. When converting costs using ratios of subnet sizes, be mindful of rounding issues and consider adding a safety margin. 

-   `ic0.cost_http_request(request_size : i64, max_res_bytes : i64, dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

    The cost of a canister http outcall via [`http_request`](#ic-http_request). `request_size` is the sum of the byte lengths of the following components of an http request: 
    - url

>     - method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
this is not part of the formula and it'd be unclear anyway how to compute the byte length of the enumeration variant

    - headers - i.e., the sum of the lengths of all keys and values 
    - body
    - transform - i.e., the sum of the transform method name length and the length of the transform context
    

>     `max_res_bytes` is the maximum response length the caller wishes to accept. Note that this argument is not optional like in the call to the management canister. The cost depends on `max_res_bytes`, so the caller must provide it explicitly. See the [`http_request`](#ic-http_request) call to the management canister API to learn about the current default and maximum values. 

Reviewer: Given that the spec actually contains the default value, let's trap if max_res_bytes exceeds that value (2,000,000).

-   `ic0.cost_sign_with_ecdsa(src : I, size : I, ecdsa_curve: i32, dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

-   `ic0.cost_sign_with_schnorr(src : I, size : I, algorithm: i32, dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

> -   `ic0.cost_vetkd_derive_encrypted_key(src : I, vetkd_curve: i32, size : I, dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

Reviewer: Shouldn't src and size be next to each other?

    This traps if `ic0.data_certificate_present()` returns `0`.

### Cycle cost calculation {#system-api-cycle-cost}

Inter-canister calls have an implicit cost, and some calls to the management canister require the caller to attach cycles to the call explicitly.  
The various cost factors may change over time, so the following system calls give the canister programmatic, up-to-date information about the costs.

> These system calls return costs in Cycles, represented by 128 bits, which will be written to the heap memory starting at offset `dst`. 

Reviewer: Remark that the results are only correct if the input values are within the size bounds for the corresponding calls.

Author: left a comment

Reviewer: Thank you! I've opened a follow-up conversation.

-   `ic0.cost_create_canister : (dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

    The cost of creating a canister on the same subnet as the calling canister via [`create_canister`](#ic-create_canister). Note that canister creation via a call to the CMC can have a different cost if the target subnet has a different replication factor.

-   `ic0.cost_http_request(request_size : i64, max_res_bytes : i64, dst : I) -> ()`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

    The cost of a canister http outcall via [`http_request`](#ic-http_request). `request_size` is the sum of the byte lengths of the following components of an http request: 
    - url
    - headers - i.e., the sum of the lengths of all keys and values 
    - body
    - transform - i.e., the sum of the transform method name length and the length of the transform context
    
    `max_res_bytes` is the maximum response length the caller wishes to accept (the caller should provide the default value of `2,000,000` if no maximum response length is provided in the actual request to the management canister). 

-   `ic0.cost_sign_with_ecdsa(src : I, size : I, ecdsa_curve: i32, dst : I) -> i32`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

> -   `ic0.cost_sign_with_schnorr(src : I, size : I, algorithm: i32, dst : I) -> i32`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `ic0.cost_sign_with_schnorr(src : I, size : I, schnorr_algorithm: i32, dst : I) -> i32`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`
```

-   `ic0.cost_vetkd_derive_encrypted_key(src : I, size : I, vetkd_curve: i32, dst : I) -> i32`; `I ∈ {i32, i64}`

    These system calls accept a key name via a textual representation for the specific signing scheme / key of a given size stored in the heap memory starting at offset `src`. They also accept an `i32` with the following interpretations:
    - `ecdsa_curve: 0 → secp256k1`

>     - `schnorr_algorithm: 0 → bip340secp256k1, 1 → ed25519`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `algorithm: 0 → bip340secp256k1, 1 → ed25519`
```

    - `vetkd_curve: 0 → bls12_381`

    See [`sign_with_ecdsa`](#ic-sign_with_ecdsa), [`sign_with_schnorr`](#ic-sign_with_schnorr) and [`vetkd_encrypted_key`](#ic-vetkd_encrypted_key) for more information.

    These system calls trap if `src` + `size` or `dst` + 16 exceed the size of the WebAssembly memory. Otherwise, they return an `i32` with the following meaning:
    - `0 (00)`: Success. The result can be found at the memory address `dst`.
    - `1 (01)`: Invalid curve or algorithm. Memory at `dst` is left unchanged. 

>     - `2 (10)`: Invalid key name for the given scheme/curve. Memory at `dst` is left unchanged. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `2 (10)`: Invalid key name for the given curve/algorithm. Memory at `dst` is left unchanged. 
```

Author: pushed something more precise

>     - `2 (10)`: Invalid key name for the given combination of signing scheme and curve/algorithm. Memory at `dst` is left unchanged. 

Reviewer 2: I noticed the return codes in the spec are formatted as `0 (00)` and `1 (01)`, which reminded me of the `bitflags` approach we discussed in the spec meeting. If we’re sticking with that, `3 (11)` would mean both "invalid curve/algorithm" and "invalid key name."

However, I checked the current implementation, and it doesn’t follow the `bitflags` approach. For example, when both the curve and key name are invalid in `ic0.cost_sign_with_ecdsa`, it returns `1 (01)` — meaning "invalid curve/algorithm" takes precedence.

To clarify this section, we should either:
- **Adopt** `bitflags`: Update the implementation to match the intention from the meeting and specify it here.
- **Drop** `bitflags`: Remove the bits representation in parentheses and explicitly state which code is returned when both fields are invalid.

Reviewer: I've removed the bitflags and emphasized that the return value 2 is only returned if the curve/algorithm is valid.

Author: And [here's](https://github.com/dfinity/portal/pull/4110#discussion_r1959433477) the reasoning

Inter-canister calls have an implicit cost, and some calls to the management canister require the caller to attach cycles to the call explicitly.  
The various cost factors may change over time, so the following system calls give the canister programmatic, up-to-date information about the costs.

> These system calls return costs in Cycles, represented by 128 bits, which will be written to the heap memory starting at offset `dst`. Note that the cost calculation is only correct for correct inputs, e.g., a method name length argument should not exceed 10'000, because such an argument would be rejected by ic0.call_perform. The cost API will still return a number in this case, but it would not have a real meaning. 

Reviewer: Where did you get the threshold of 10,000 from (the spec [mentions](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec#system-api-module) 20,000)? Also the [validation](https://github.com/dfinity/ic/blob/0d9bdcb16515d8b8194d9bcce21e5caac8cca666/rs/system_api/src/request_in_prep.rs#L87) of method name length happens already in ic0.call_new.

Author: fixed

    See [`sign_with_ecdsa`](#ic-sign_with_ecdsa), [`sign_with_schnorr`](#ic-sign_with_schnorr) and [`vetkd_encrypted_key`](#ic-vetkd_encrypted_key) for more information.

>     These system calls trap if `src` + `size` exceeds the size of the WebAssembly memory. Otherwise, they return an `i32` with the following meaning:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    These system calls trap if `src` + `size`  or `dst` + 8 exceed the size of the WebAssembly memory. Otherwise, they return an `i32` with the following meaning:
```

    - `0 (00)`: Success. The result can be found at the memory address `dst`.
    - `1 (01)`: Invalid curve or algorithm. Memory at `dst` is left unchanged. 

>     - `2 (10)`: Invalid key name for the given scheme/curve. Memory at `dst` is left unchanged. 

Reviewer: What if both key and curve are invalid? Why don't we return 3 (11).

Author: A key name's validity depends on the signing scheme and curve. So returning 3 is just not a sensible code path.
First we find all keys that have the given curve. Then we check if one of them has the given name. If the first check fails, the second one is irrelevant, and performing the check anyway is useless. 
Imagine you want Ecdsa/C1/"key_2" and the system tells you that it does not know this, but why not use Schnorr instead because Schnorr/C2/"key_2" exists? In other words, "there exists a key with this name, but for a different curve / scheme" is useless, because the user 1) specifies an scheme endpoint and 2) constructs a typed argument with the desired scheme and curve, so they already know what scheme / curve they want.

  if not principal_bytes encode a principal then
    Trap {cycles_used = es.cycles_used;}
  if principal_bytes ∉ es.subnets then
    Trap {cycles_used = es.cycles_used;}
  copy_cycles_to_canister<es>(dst, arbitrary())

I ∈ {i32, i64}
ic0.cost_schnorr<es>(src: I, size: I, dst: I) : () = 
  principal_bytes = copy_from_canister<es>(src, size)
  if not principal_bytes encode a principal then
    Trap {cycles_used = es.cycles_used;}
  if principal_bytes ∉ es.subnets then
    Trap {cycles_used = es.cycles_used;}
  copy_cycles_to_canister<es>(dst, arbitrary())

I ∈ {i32, i64}
ic0.cost_vetkey<es>(src: I, size: I, dst: I) : () = 
  principal_bytes = copy_from_canister<es>(src, size)
  if not principal_bytes encode a principal then
    Trap {cycles_used = es.cycles_used;}
  if principal_bytes ∉ es.subnets then
    Trap {cycles_used = es.cycles_used;}
  copy_cycles_to_canister<es>(dst, arbitrary())

I ∈ {i32, i64}
ic0.replication_factor<es, S>(src: I, size: I, dst: I) : i32 = 
  principal_bytes = copy_from_canister<es>(src, size)
  if not principal_bytes encode a principal then
    Trap {cycles_used = es.cycles_used;}
  return S.canister_subnet[principal_bytes].subnet_size

> 

Author: @mraszyk not sure how to refer to `S` from here. It does not seem to be contained in `es`. 
(Also, it is confusing that S above always uses `CanisterId` where I would expect `Principal`)

Author: Code was updated since, but the question remains.

Reviewer: the subnet size is available is es.params.sysenv.subnet_size

Author: Of the subnet the canister is on, right? That's how I interpreted `es`. 
But I need the subnet size of a subnet specified by principal_bytes.

Reviewer: right, then let's just use arbitrary() to leave it an implementation detail

  then return 1
  else return 0

I ∈ {i32, i64}
ic0.cost_call<es>(method_name_size: i64, payload_size: i64, dst: I) : () = 
  copy_cycles_to_canister<es>(dst, arbitrary())

I ∈ {i32, i64}
ic0.cost_create_canister<es>(dst: I) : () = 
  copy_cycles_to_canister<es>(dst, arbitrary())

I ∈ {i32, i64}

> ic0.cost_cost_http_request<es>(request_size: i64, max_res_bytes: i64, dst: I) : () = 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ic0.cost_http_request<es>(request_size: i64, max_res_bytes: i64, dst: I) : () = 
```

  copy_cycles_to_canister<es>(dst, arbitrary())

I ∈ {i32, i64}
ic0.cost_sign_with_ecdsa<es>(src: I, size: I, ecdsa_curve: i32, dst: I) : i32 = 
  known_keys = arbitrary()
  known_curves = arbitrary()
  key_name = copy_from_canister<es>(src, size)
  if ecdsa_curve ∉ known_curves then
    return 1
  if key_name ∉ known_keys then
    return 2
  copy_cycles_to_canister<es>(dst, arbitrary())
  return 0

I ∈ {i32, i64}
ic0.cost_sign_with_schnorr<es>(src: I, size: I, algorithm: i32, dst: I) : i32 = 
  known_keys = arbitrary()

>   known_curves = arbitrary()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  known_algorithms = arbitrary()
```

  copy_cycles_to_canister<es>(dst, arbitrary())

I ∈ {i32, i64}
ic0.cost_sign_with_ecdsa<es>(src: I, size: I, ecdsa_curve: i32, dst: I) : i32 = 
  key_name = copy_from_canister<es>(src, size)

>   if ecdsa_curve ∉ known_curves then

Reviewer: maybe say that `known_curves = arbitrary()` and `known_keys = arbitrary()` so that these two identifiers are well-defined; also below
